Jesus came to bear witness to the truth.
Standing on trial before the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, Jesus boldly stated, as recorded
at John 1837, for this I have come into the world that I should bear witness to the truth.
Who is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.
Jesus used his three-and-a-half-year ministry on earth to teach people the truth about
Jehovah God and His purpose. Those who were on the side of the truth responded favorably,
and wanted to learn more. Others, however, by their response to the good news,
reveal themselves to be enemies of the truth. As Jesus neared the end of His earthly ministry,
He bore witness to the truth during a series of dramatic confrontations in the temple.
What lessons can we learn from the exciting events recorded in Matthew chapter 21 and 22?
As we will see, these two chapters of Matthew highlight Jesus' courage,
his masterful teaching ability, and his persistence in bearing thorough witness to the truth.
Studying these chapters will help us to imitate Jesus' fine qualities.
Let us begin with Matthew chapter 21.
Verses 12 to 14 relate how Jesus threw out those selling and buying animals in the temple
and overturned the tables of the money changers. These events took place on 9th and 10th 33 CE.
The next day, the chief priest directly challenged Jesus' authority to disrupt their business.
How would he respond? Let us start the reading at verse 23.
After he went into the temple, the chief priest and the elders of the people came up to him
while he was teaching and said, by what authority do you do these things? And who gave you this
authority? I will also ask you one thing. If you tell me, then I will also tell you by what
authority I do these things. The baptism by John from what source was it from heaven or from men?
If we say from heaven, he will say to us, why then did you not believe him?
But if we say from men, we have the crowd to fear for they all regard John as a prophet.
We do not know. We do not know. Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.
What do you think? A man had two children. Going up to the first, he said,
child, go work today in the vineyard. In answer, this one said, I will not. But afterward,
he felt regret and went out. Approaching the second, he said the same. This one replied,
I will, sir, but did not go out. Which of the two did the will of his father?
The first. Truly, I say to you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are going ahead of you
into the kingdom of God. For John came to you in a way of righteousness, but you did not believe him.
However, the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. And even when you saw this,
you did not feel regret afterwards so as to believe him. Here another illustration.
There was a man, a landowner, who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a wine
press in it and erected a tower. Then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
When the fruit season came around, he sent his slaves to the cultivators to collect his fruit.
However, the cultivators took his slaves and they beat one up. Another they killed.
Another they stoned. Again, he sent other slaves more than the first group.
But they did the same to these. Lastly, he sent his son to them, saying,
they will respect my son. On seeing the son, the cultivators set among themselves,
this is the heir. Come, let us kill him and get his inheritance.
So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those cultivators?
Because they are evil, he will bring a terrible destruction on them and will lease the vineyard
to other cultivators who will give him the fruits when they become due.
Did you never read in the Scriptures?
The stone that the builders rejected. This has become the chief cornerstone.
This has come from Jehovah and it is marvelous in our eyes.
This is why I say to you, the kingdom of God will be taken from you and be given to a nation
producing its fruits. Also, the person falling on this stone will be shattered.
As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his illustrations, they knew that he was speaking
about them. Although they wanted to seize him, they feared the crowds because these regarded
him as a prophet. In challenging Jesus with the words in verse 23, by what authority do you do
these things? And who gave you this authority? The chief priests and elders show gross disrespect
for Jehovah, his temple, and his inspired word of truth. Jesus boldly counted their challenge
with a question that left them speechless, for it exposed them as treacherous and calculating.
Before they could recover, Jesus followed up with two illustrations. First, he compared the religious
leaders to a rebellious son. They had made a promise to do God's will, but had not kept it.
Next, Jesus announced them as wicked caretakers of Jehovah's Vineyard, who would be held responsible
for their failure to cultivate the fruitage of faith in God's Son.
Jesus illustrations were so masterful that the chief priests and elders, unwittingly,
pronounced judgment on themselves. The religious leaders were furious and they would have tried
to kill Jesus, but they feared the crowds. So they took the indirect approach and conspired to
trap Jesus in his speech. How would Jesus handle this new challenge? Please turn your attention
to Matthew 22, 15 through 33. Then the Pharisees went and conspired together in order to trap him in
his speech. So they sent their disciples to him together with party followers of Herod, saying,
Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God and truth. And you do not seek anyone's
favor for you do not look at the outward appearance of people. Tell us then, what do you think?
Is it lawful to be head-tax to Caesar or not? But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said,
why do you put me to the test hypocrites? Show me the tax coin. They brought him a denarius.
He said to them, whose image and inscription is this? Caesars, Caesars.
Pay back therefore Caesar's things to Caesar, but God's things to God.
When they heard that, they were amazed and they left him and went away.
On that day, the Sadducees, whose say there is no resurrection, came and asked him,
Teacher. Moses said, if any man dies without having children, his brother must marry his wife and
raise up offspring for his brother. Now, there were seven brothers with us. The first married and
died, and having no offspring, he left his wife for his brother. The same thing happened with the
second and the third through all seven. Last of all, the woman died. So in the resurrection
of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had her as a wife.
You are mistaken because you know neither the scriptures nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage,
but they are as angels in heaven.
Regarding the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God who said,
I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.
He is the God, not of the dead, but of the living.
On hearing that, the crowds were astounded at his teaching.
Jesus was approached first by party followers of Herod and disciples of the Pharisees.
Although these two groups held conflicting political and social views,
they were united in their hatred for Jesus.
Flattering words prefaced a dangerous question.
Is it lawful to pay head to access to Caesar or not?
Had Jesus answered, yes, it is lawful. He could have enraged the crowd.
For many would have felt that he was condoning the injustices they suffered at the hands of the Romans.
On the other hand, a response such as, it is not lawful.
It could have sparked a revolt resulting in Jesus' immediate arrest for sedition.
Jesus did not fall into either trap.
Instead, using a coin, he responded with an object lesson that amazed his questioners.
Next, the Sadducees intending to discredit Jesus,
proposed the scenario that they thought would expose belief in the resurrection
as foolishness. In response, Jesus used flawless reasoning to highlight
scriptural evidence that the Sadducees had apparently never considered before.
They professed to believe the words of Jehovah recorded at Exodus 3.6.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
When Jehovah spoke those words, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had long since died.
Yet Jehovah said, I am their God. Not, I was their God.
By speaking of these long dead patriarchs as though they were still alive,
Jehovah showed that his purpose to resurrect his fateful servants is sure of fulfillment.
Additionally, Jesus told the Sadducees that in the resurrection, neither do men marry nor are
women given in marriage, but they are as angels in heaven. He may have been using the opportunity
to reveal truths about the heavenly resurrection for the benefit of sincere disciples
who would one day be in line to receive such a resurrection.
The crowds were astounded at Jesus' authoritative teaching from the Scriptures.
Finally, the Pharisees and Sadducees joined forces to test Jesus one last time.
Hey, scribe from among them, verse in the law, presented a deceptively simple question,
namely, which is the greatest commandment. In Jesus' day, this was a hotly debated question.
Would Jesus say something in answer that would damage his credibility?
Let us listen to Matthew 22, 34, through 46, to learn from Jesus' response. That's Matthew 22,
beginning with verse 34. After the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees,
they came together in one group, and one of them, first in the law, tested him by asking,
Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?
You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole
mind. This is the greatest and first commandment. The second, like it, is this.
You must love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments, the whole law hangs and the
prophets. Now, while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
what do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he? David's. How is it then that David under
inspiration calls him Lord? Saying, Jehovah said to my Lord,
sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet. If then David calls him Lord,
how is he his son? And nobody was able to say a word and reply to him.
And from that day on, no one dared to question him any further. Quoting from God's word,
Jesus captured the essence of true worship, love. The mosaic law consisted of more than 600
individual laws and regulations, yet Jesus, without hesitation, selected the two commandments
on which the whole law hangs. The clear truth of his answer cut through human tradition and empty
debate. Jesus then turned the tables on his opposers with this question. If the Christ is to be a son
of David, then when is David referred to him in the Psalms as my Lord? More than a mirror riddle,
this question uncovered the spiritual ignorance of Jesus' enemies. Exposed a spiritually blind,
his opposers never dared to question Jesus again. How can we follow Jesus' example in bearing witness
to the truth? First, by imitating his courage, Jesus' courage was based on faith in God.
We grow in faith by praying for Holy Spirit, by meditating on Bible accounts that highlight the
courageous acts of God's servants, and by allowing what we learn at Christian meetings to sink into
our hearts. Doing this enables us to build strong faith on the foundation of truth.
Another way that we can follow Jesus' example in bearing witness to the truth is by imitating
his masterful teaching. We can reach the hearts of sincere listeners with a truth
by imitating Jesus' use of questions, illustrations, and object lessons, as well as his reasoning
and skillful use of God's written word. Third, we are following Jesus' example when we persevere
in our efforts to bear thorough witness. Never give up in preaching and teaching the good news.
Those who reject the truth at first may respond later. The inspired record in acts of apostles
tells us that in time thousands of Jews began paying attention to the good news that had been
preached by Jesus, including a large crowd of priests and some who had been Pharisees.
These no longer acted in ignorance. Rather, they repented and gained Jehovah's favor.
So whether you are facing direct challenges or indirect ones, be determined to bear witness to
the truth as Jesus did.